Design pattern adalah sebuah design yang diperuntukkan supaya code yang kita buat terhindar dari kesalahan pada mendesign.
Design Pattern menjelaskan masalahnya, solusinya, kapan kita perlu implementasi pattern tsb dan konsekuensi dari pattern tsb.
By using the design patterns you can make your code more flexible, reusable and maintainable.

Selecting a Design Pattern :
-> To avoid redesign
-> Focus in what will vary in a design

Ada beberapa tipe design pattern yaitu :
a. Creational
Pada creational design pattern, lebih ditekankan pada pembuatan instansiasi class atau pembutan object.
Biasanya kalau class, cara menginstansiasi itu dengan inheritance sedangkan pada object dengan delegasi
Creational design patterns are : the Factory Method, Abstract Factory, Builder, Singleton, Object Pool, and Prototype.

b. Structural
Pada structural design pattern, inti dari pattern ini adalah bagaimana caranya menggabungkan class dan objek yang berbeda menjadi struktur
yang lebih besar dan mencetuskan fitur yang baru.
Structural design patterns are : Adapter, Bridge, Composite, Decorator, Facade, Flyweight, Private Class Data, and Proxy.

c. Behavioral
Pada behavioral design pattern, intinya komunikasi class antar objek, jenis ini lebih concern kepada komunikasi antar objek.
Behavioral patterns are : Chain of responsibility, Command, Interpreter, Iterator, Mediator, Memento, Null Object, Observer,
State, Strategy, Template method, Visitor


1. Strategy :
Menekankan pada prinsip bahwa sebuah class bisa mengimplement beberapa interface untuk nantinya di aplikasikan kepada client.
Contoh : bubbleSort dan quickSort, dalam file kecil client implement bubbleSort namun pada saat file besar, quickSort lebih bermanfaat.

Di UML :
Class client akan meng-implement satu atau lebih interface, trus si interface juga bisa di extends oleh beberapa interface.

"A Strategy defines a set of algorithms that can be used interchangeably."
"In computer programming, the strategy pattern (also known as the policy pattern) is a behavioural software design pattern that enables 
an algorithm's behavior to be selected at runtime."


2. Observer : 
contoh : chat room

Real world example :
A good example would be the job seekers where they subscribe to some job posting site and they are notified whenever there is a matching 
job opportunity.

In plain words : 
Defines a dependency between objects so that whenever an object changes its state, all its dependents are notified.

Wikipedia says : 
The observer pattern is a software design pattern in which an object, called the subject, maintains a list of its dependents, 
called observers, and notifies them automatically of any state changes, usually by calling one of their methods.


3. Decorator : => Nambahin responsibility atau pretelan baru secara dinamik

Real world example : 	
Imagine you run a car service shop offering multiple services. Now how do you calculate the bill to be charged? 
You pick one service and dynamically keep adding to it the prices for the provided services till you get the final cost. 
Here each type of service is a decorator.

In plain words : 
Decorator pattern lets you dynamically change the behavior of an object at run time by wrapping them in an object of a decorator class.

Wikipedia says : 
In object-oriented programming, the decorator pattern is a design pattern that allows behavior to be added to an individual object, 
either statically or dynamically, without affecting the behavior of other objects from the same class. The decorator pattern is often useful 
for adhering to the Single Responsibility Principle, as it allows functionality to be divided between classes with unique areas of concern.

Misal : 
buat interface coffee dengan method getCost() dan getDescription(), trus buat class SimpleCoffee yang meng-implement interface coffee, 
lalu didalam class SimpleCoffee ada constructor, method getCost() return 10 dan getDescription() return simple coffee sebagai string,
trus ada class lain, mis : MilkyCoffee, StrawberryCoffee, ChocoCoffee, nah masing2 class tsb memiliki constsructor, getCost(), getDescription(),
bedanya adalah pada SimpleCoffee kita getCost return 10, tetapi pada MilkyCoffee kita tambahain return 10+2 misalnya. Dan StrawberryCoffee,
serta ChocoCoffee yang dimana getCost-nya mereturn 10+ apa gitu angka.
Jadi initinya pada decorator, kita bisa menspesifikasikan custom attribute yang ingin kita masukkan.


5. Abstract Factory Methods : 

Real world example :
Extending our door example from Simple Factory. Based on your needs you might get a wooden door from a wooden door shop, iron door from an 
iron shop or a PVC door from the relevant shop. Plus you might need a guy with different kind of specialities to fit the door, for example 
a carpenter for wooden door, welder for iron door etc. As you can see there is a dependency between the doors now, wooden door needs carpenter,
iron door needs a welder etc.

In plain words :
A factory of factories; a factory that groups the individual but related/dependent factories together without specifying their concrete classes.

Wikipedia says :
The abstract factory pattern provides a way to encapsulate a group of individual factories that have a common theme without specifying their 
concrete classes


6. Singleton : => 

Real world example : 
There can only be one president of a country at a time. The same president has to be brought to action, whenever duty calls. 
President here is singleton.

In plain words : 
Ensures that only one object of a particular class is ever created.

Wikipedia says : 
In software engineering, the singleton pattern is a software design pattern that restricts the instantiation of a class to one object. This is
useful when exactly one object is needed to coordinate actions across the system.

Singleton pattern is actually considered an anti-pattern and overuse of it should be avoided. It is not necessarily bad and could have some 
valid use-cases but should be used with caution because it introduces a global state in your application and change to it in one place could 
affect in the other areas and it could become pretty difficult to debug. The other bad thing about them is it makes your code tightly coupled 
plus mocking the singleton could be difficult.


for UTS : 
Factory Method, Adapter, Prototype

7. Adapter : => wrapper yang memperbolehkan interface yang ada di sebuah class bisa cross-work dengan interface lain, ini gunanya supaya
class yang saling berbeda bisa bekerja(connect) tanpa memodifikasi source code mereka.

Real world example :
Consider that you have some pictures in your memory card and you need to transfer them to your computer. In order to transfer them you need some
kind of adapter that is compatible with your computer ports so that you can attach memory card to your computer. In this case card reader is an
adapter. Another example would be the famous power adapter; a three legged plug can't be connected to a two pronged outlet, it needs to use a
power adapter that makes it compatible with wthe two pronged outlet. Yet another example could be a translator translating words spoken by one
person to another

In plain words :
Adapter pattern lets you wrap an otherwise incompatible object in an adapter to make it compatible with another class.

Wikipedia says :
In software engineering, the adapter pattern is a software design pattern that allows the interface of an existing class to be used as another
interface. It is often used to make existing classes work with others without modifying their source code.

Applicability : 
-> Use the Adapter class when you want to use some existing class, but its interface isn’t compatible with the rest of your code.
-> Use the pattern when you want to reuse several existing subclasses that lack some common functionality that can’t be added to the superclass.


8. Prototype :

Real world example :
Remember dolly? The sheep that was cloned! Lets not get into the details but the key point here is that it is all about cloning

In plain words :
Create object based on an existing object through cloning.

Wikipedia says : 
The prototype pattern is a creational design pattern in software development. It is used when the type of objects to create is determined by a 
prototypical instance, which is cloned to produce new objects.

In short, it allows you to create a copy of an existing object and modify it to your needs, instead of going through the trouble of creating an
object from scratch and setting it up.

When to use?
When an object is required that is similar to existing object or when the creation would be expensive as compared to cloning.

The new Operator considered harmful.

Advantages of Prototype Design Pattern :

Adding and removing products at run-time – Prototypes let you incorporate a new concrete product class into a system simply by registering a
prototypical instance with the client. That’s a bit more flexible than other creational patterns, because a client can install and remove 
prototypes at run-time.

Specifying new objects by varying values – Highly dynamic systems let you define new behavior through object composition by specifying values
for an object’s variables and not by defining new classes.

Specifying new objects by varying structure – Many applications build objects from parts and subparts. For convenience, such applications often 
let you instantiate complex, user-defined structures to use a specific subcircuit again and again.

Reduced subclassing – Factory Method often produces a hierarchy of Creator classes that parallels the product class hierarchy. The Prototype 
pattern lets you clone a prototype instead of asking a factory method to make a new object. Hence you don’t need a Creator class hierarchy at 
all.


4. Factory Methods : => Hiring manager trus setiap tahap pada interview itu di assign ke beda2 role interviewer.

Real world example
Consider the case of a hiring manager. It is impossible for one person to interview for each of the positions. Based on the job opening, 
she has to decide and delegate the interview steps to different people.

In plain words
It provides a way to delegate the instantiation logic to child classes.

Wikipedia says
In class-based programming, the factory method pattern is a creational pattern that uses factory methods to deal with the problem of 
creating objects without having to specify the exact class of the object that will be created. This is done by creating objects by calling 
a factory method—either specified in an interface and implemented by child classes, or implemented in a base class and optionally overridden 
by derived classes—rather than by calling a constructor. 
